Address partial feedback raised during RGLC. (#112)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke: draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke.md

* An AEAD encryption algorithm {{!RFC5116}}:
  - Seal(key, nonce, aad, pt): Encrypt and authenticate plaintext
    `pt` with associated data `aad` using secret key `key` and nonce
    `nonce`, yielding ciphertext and tag `ct` or the error value
    `NonceOverflowError`

>   - Open(key, nonce, aad, ct): Decrypt ciphertext `ct` using

Author: For consistency, yeah, it should. Good catch!

  return Extract(salt, labeledIKM)

def LabeledExpand(PRK, label, info, L):
  labeledInfo = concat(I2OSP(L, 2), "RFCXXXX ", label, info)
  return Expand(PRK, labeledInfo, L)
~~~

\[\[RFC editor: please change "RFCXXXX" to the correct number before publication.]]

## DH-Based KEM

Suppose we are given a KDF, and a Diffie-Hellman group providing the
following operations:

- DeriveKeyPair(ikm): Derive a key pair `(skX, pkX)` from the byte string `ikm`,
  where `ikm` SHOULD have at least `Nsk` bytes of entropy (see
  {{derive-key-pair}} for discussion)
- DH(sk, pk): Perform a non-interactive DH exchange using the
  private key sk and public key pk to produce a Diffie-Hellman
  shared secret of length Ndh

> - Serialize(pk): Produce a byte string of length Npk

Author: Yep, good catch. I'll fix these and do a quick scan for others.

  encoding the public key `pk`
- Deserialize(enc): Parse a byte string of length Npk to recover a

>   public key (note: this function can fail)

Author: Yep -- I'll add it.

~~~
def ExtractAndExpand(dh, kemContext):
  prk = LabeledExtract(zero(0), "GROUP-dh", dh)

>   return LabeledExpand(prk, "GROUP-prk", kemContext, Nzz)

Reviewer: How necessary is the `GROUP` prefix? This complicates things a non-trivial but acceptable amount in implementation, since I'm trying to avoid allocation entirely.

Author: Calling @kwantam! My take is that this is just good hygiene. Without the prefix, it's harder to reason about separation of these different ROs.

Reviewer 2: As @chris-wood says, it makes it easier to reasonable about random oracle separation. It may be overkill (I think in my original comment I said something like "this is probably paranoia, but...").

The kind of thing one might worry about without `GROUP` is a case where it's possible to confuse serialized elements of two different groups. In this case it *could* be possible to construct two exchanges with identical `kemContext` inputs. (Not clear that's enough to construct an attack, but we can completely rule out attacks of this kind by including `GROUP`.)

Reviewer 3: I agree with @chris-wood and @kwantam that binding `zz` explicitly to the underlying DH is important.

Would it be easier for you to implement it avoiding allowation, @rozbb, if it was in the style of the context in KeySchedule? There, we include `kem_id`, `kdf_id`, `aead_id`, all as 2-byte fixed-sized values. Instead of doing "GROUP-dh", we could do:

```
  prk = LabeledExtract(zero(0), concat(kem_id, "dh"), dh)
  return LabeledExpand(prk, concat(kem_id, "prk"), kemContext, Nzz)
```

The `kem_id` already is unique per DHKEM, and also, it would avoid needing a separate table for the values of GROUP, because the table in the “Algorithm Identifiers” Section already has the `kem_id`s.

Reviewer 3: Ok, actually, I suggest the following for Encap and Decap:

```
  kemContext = concat(I2OSP(kem_id, 2), enc, pkRm)
```

and this for AuthEncap and AuthDecap:

```
  kemContext = concat(I2OSP(kem_id, 2), enc, pkRm, pkSm)
```

Then it is exactly in the same style as in KeySchedule. The added label `kem_id` always has two bytes. I think the LabeledExtract call in ExtractAndExpand does not need to have `kem_id` as a label, because the intermediary value `dh` is never exposed. The important thing is that `zz` is explicitly bound to the scheme's name, and for that it is enough to have it in `kemContext`. (I think we had a similar reasoning when we decided what to include where in KeySchedule's context)

Reviewer 3: On the other hand, binding to the GROUP plays a similar role as the RFCXXX label which we do include in *both* LabeledExtract *and* LabeledExpand, even if the LabeledExtract results are never exposes. And this is about, as @kwantam said in #108, that the calls are orthogonal, which makes it easier to reason with separate random oracles for separate ciphersuites.

So I have a tendency for including `kem_id` in both, as I suggested in my first reply in this thread.

What do you think?

Author: I like it! This has the same effect and is less text. Stand by for that change.

Author: @blipp fixed -- please have a look.

Reviewer: Yes, this is much cleaner! In fact, DeriveKeyPair should be using `kem_id` as well, instead of the `desc` string. I'll make the PR after this lands.

def AuthEncap(pkR, skS):
  skE, pkE = DeriveKeyPair(random(Nsk))
  dh = concat(DH(skE, pkR), DH(skS, pkR))
  enc = Serialize(pkE)

  pkRm = Serialize(pkR)
  pkSm = Serialize(pk(skS))
  kemContext = concat(enc, pkRm, pkSm)

  zz = ExtractAndExpand(dh, kemContext)
  return zz, enc

def AuthDecap(enc, skR, pkS):
  pkE = Deserialize(enc)
  dh = concat(DH(skR, pkE), DH(skR, pkS))

  pkRm = Serialize(pk(skR))
  pkSm = Serialize(pkS)
  kemContext = concat(enc, pkRm, pkSm)

  zz = ExtractAndExpand(dh, kemContext)
  return zz
~~~

The string "GROUP" used in the `ExtractAndExpand` function is equal to the
ASCII-encoded name of the underlying DHKEM group. The table below lists the values
for this parameter for all DHKEM variants specified in this document. For example,
the `LabeledExtract` label for DHKEM(P-256, HKDF-SHA256) uses the string "P256-dh".

> | DHKEM  | Group Name |

Author: I went with the former -- thanks!

the nonces used so that the same nonce is not used with multiple
plaintexts. It also has an interface for exporting secret values,
as described in {{hpke-export}}. See {{hpke-dem}} for a description

> of this structure and its interfaces. As is standard with AEAD interfaces,

Reviewer 4: I would drop this first clause, "As is standard with AEAD interfaces"

Author: 👍

* `mode` - A one-byte value indicating the HPKE mode, defined in {{hpke}}.
* `zz` - A KEM shared secret generated for this transaction
* `info` - Application-supplied information (optional; default value

>   "") of maximum length 65535 bytes.

Reviewer: I actually don't need a length limit on HKDF `info` inputs anymore in order to avoid allocation. Your call if you want to keep it or not.

Author: I inherited this from length restrictions on the TLS Exporter API.

* `psk` - A pre-shared secret held by both the sender
  and the recipient (optional; default value `zero(Nh)`) of maximum

>   length 255 bytes.

Reviewer: Also don't need this limit anymore.

Author: This one I pulled out of thin air. I can make it larger to match. :)

* `pskID` - An identifier for the PSK (optional; default value `zero(0)`)

>   of maximum length 65535 bytes.

Reviewer: Ditto

HPKE allows multiple encryption operations to be done based on a
given setup transaction.  Since the public-key operations involved
in setup are typically more expensive than symmetric encryption or
decryption, this allows applications to amortize the cost of the
public-key operations, reducing the overall overhead.

In order to avoid nonce reuse, however, this decryption must be
stateful. Each of the setup procedures above produces a context object
that stores the required state:

> * The AEAD algorithm and corresponding key, an initial nonce value,

Reviewer 4: Disagree with collapsing all of these bullets.  If you want to group them, you could have top-level "AEAD parameters" and "Export parameters"

Author: It felt cleaner, but I don't feel strongly about this. I made a slight variation that's closer to what we had.

It is up to the application to ensure that encryptions and
decryptions are done in the proper sequence, so that encryption
and decryption nonces align. If `Context.Seal` or `Context.Open` would cause
the `seq` field to overflow, then the implementation MUST fail with an error.

> (In the pseudocode below, `IncrementSeq` fails with an error when `seq` overflows,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(In the pseudocode below, `Context.IncrementSeq` fails with an error when `seq` overflows,
```

It is up to the application to ensure that encryptions and
decryptions are done in the proper sequence, so that encryption
and decryption nonces align. If a Seal or Open operation would cause the `seq`
field to overflow, then the implementation MUST return an error. (In the
pseudocode below, `IncrementSeq` fails with an error when `seq` overflows,

> which causes `Context.Seal` and `Context.Open` to fail accordingly.) Note that

Reviewer 3: Suggestion, to make it clearer about which Seal and Open this is, and maybe failing with an error is more explicitly saying that no other value can be returned (like, not an error *and* the ciphertext): “If `Context.Seal` or `Context.Open` would cause the `seq` field to overflow, then the implementation MUST fail with an error.”

Author: That works for me -- I'll add it. Thanks!

> the internal Seal and Open calls inside correspond to the context's AEAD

Author: Agreed. It's also a nice way to keep the return types clean. Namely, in the Seal/Open calls, we return two possible types: errors or plaintext/ciphertext. If we use `raise`, then we only return one possible type (plaintext or ciphertext).

to the TLS 1.3 exporter interface (See {{?RFC8446}}, Section 7.5). This interface takes as
input a context string `exporter_context` and desired length `L` (in bytes), and produces
a secret derived from the internal exporter secret using the corresponding KDF Expand

> function. For the KDFs defined in this specification, `L` has a maximum length of
> `255*Nh` bytes. Future specifications which define new KDFs MUST specify a bound for `L`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
function. For the KDFs defined in this specification, `L` has a maximum value of
`255*Nh`. Future specifications which define new KDFs MUST specify a bound for `L`.
```

public-key validation on all public key inputs, as defined in section 5.6.2.3.4
of {{keyagreement}}. This includes checking that the coordinates are in the
correct range, that the point is on the curve, and that the point is not the
point at infinity. Additionally, senders and recipients MUST ensure the
Diffie-Hellman shared secret is not the point at infinity.

> For X25519 and X448, validation of public keys is not required. Senders and

Reviewer 4: I would rephrase as: "For X25519 and X448, public keys and DH outputs MUST be validated as described in {{RFC7748}}.  In particular, recipients MUST check whether the DH shared secret is the all-zero value and abort if so."

Author: 👍
